The world's largest machine is so big it
can be seen from space.
In fact, it covers huge areas of the
Earth's
surface. Oh, wait, sorry, hold on. Give
me the other side.
>> [music]
>> There we go.
Our lives depend on electricity, if you
haven't noticed [clears throat] already,
and all of that electricity in almost
all parts of the world is delivered to
you by the grid.
>> [music]
>> The world's biggest, most complicated
machine ever built.
And if you start to notice the grid,
you'll see it everywhere.
But, it is so everywhere that [music]
people just kind of forget it.
For a long time, rich countries haven't
had to think about their grids all that
much.
Their electricity demand has been pretty
much flat since the 2000s.
But, times are changing.
The explosive growth of AI, the rapid
build-out of data centers, they're
consuming enormous amounts of energy.
You have four companies now that are
intending to spend over $300 billion
this year. With industries like AI and
EVs growing fast, the world is predicted
to use twice as much electricity by
2050. [music]
That's roughly a whole new USA's worth
of electricity every 5 years. To make
all that power and get it to where it
needs to go, the world's grids need to
evolve. All that new infrastructure will
cost billions of dollars. But, so did
broadband internet, [music] and that's
ended up creating trillions of dollars
of value.
And some countries' grids are evolving
faster than others. [music] In China,
power generation has gone up seven times
since 2000. The battle to build the best
grid is a battle to win the future.
And with more power comes more
opportunities. New ideas and
technologies are in the works [music] to
massively upgrade the world's wiring.
It's spinning round at 1,500 RPM.
Can it all happen fast enough to power
the future? [music]
The answer is going to get a bit nerdy
and technical,
but we're all nerds here, right?
Okay, good.
Right, the show's called Primer, so
here's a quick primer on the grid.
>> [music]
>> So, a typical grid structure looks like
a large power plant somewhere, typically
far away from where you are, that is
generating power. Could be nuclear,
could be gas, could be hydro, could be
solar these days.
And then a long series of transmission
lines,
a substation that makes sure that the
electricity is distributed to you in
just the exact form as you need it.
And then it is consumed as charging a
laptop [music] or running a motor inside
a factory.
These days, the [music] grid is pretty
much everywhere. String out all the
world's transmission cables end to end
and they'd stretch 42 million miles.
That's almost halfway to the sun.
And all the parts of this massive system
have to work together in perfect
harmony. A sudden imbalance, say a large
[music] power plant switching off
without warning, can easily throw the
whole system out of WHACK OR EVEN
WE'RE LOSING
WELL, MORE ON THAT LATER.
BUT most of the time, the grid works
just fine, powering our lives and
helping our economies grow.
So, there is a direct relationship
between how much energy an economy
consumes and how much economic output
results. The richer you are, the more
electricity you consume, the bigger your
grid. And the bigger your grid, the more
electricity you consume, the richer you
become.
That feedback loop has been going strong
since the early 20th [music] century,
when electricity started to become a
major energy source.
Suddenly, all you needed to bring energy
into your home or business was a wire.
>> [music]
>> In 1910, just 14% of US homes had
electricity. [music] By 1930, it was
70%. Companies like GE sold millions of
fridges and TVs, and the grid [music]
grew fast.
But things started to change in the
1970s, when, [music] thanks to the oil
crisis, energy started getting more
expensive. So, that's when the first big
movements in energy efficiency began
with major energy efficiency programs
run by electric utilities. That's Rich
Miller, a former VP of Con Edison, New
York City's power company. Con Edison
changed its slogan [music] as a company
in the 1970s from dig we must to save a
watt. So, you know, a great example of
how everything changed [music]
during that time period. At the same
time, rich countries started doing less
manufacturing [music]
and more office work, which used less
energy.
By the early 2000s, [music]
we really began to see some flattening
of electric [music] growth.
In fact, investing economies for the
last two decades, [music]
electricity demand was either flat or
declining.
>> [music]
>> So, the grid, which had been growing
non-stop for 100 years, suddenly didn't
have to grow anymore.
And that was kind of nice while it
lasted. GDP kept growing while we used
the same amount of electricity.
But lately, energy demand isn't looking
so flat anymore. Now, we're actually
beginning to see a growth in demand and
consumption again. It really is a
three-part contributor. It's moving from
gasoline cars to electric cars, moving
from oil furnaces and gas boilers to
heat pumps,
and, of course, the growth of artificial
intelligence, which is powered by data
centers that consume a lot of
electricity.
Those industries could add a lot of
economic growth, but they absolutely
guzzle electricity. According to one
estimate, AI could boost the global
economy as much as 15% over the next
decade, but it could also use as much
power as the entire country of Japan by
2030.
So, meeting all that new electricity
demand requires the entire grid to
become bigger. And because it's the
first time it's happening in three
decades, the industry has been caught
I don't want to say but it's pants down.
If an industry doesn't build something
for a while, it tends to have a hard
time starting up again.
Supply chains atrophy.
Infrastructure becomes outdated and run
down, and workforces dwindle and age
out.
That's what's happening with electric
grids in many Western countries.
But, elsewhere in the world, some
countries have their pants very much on.
China's been building its grid in real
time. It's basically gone non-stop since
the 1990s. So, they still have a
heavily, you know, employed skilled
labor pool that they can pull from, and
they have a supply chain that's mature
and ready to grow as the needs are
growing.
All that's been happening because it's
had to.
China does a lot of the manufacturing
that Western countries mostly stopped
doing, and the grid has had to keep up.
In China, you still have pretty rapid
economic growth. A bad year here is 5%
growth, which is, you know, much higher
than you normally see in developed
economies like the US and Europe. So,
whereas, you know, the US has barely
seen a an uptick in power generation, in
China, power generation has gone up
seven times since 2000.
I moved to China 29 years ago and the
difference between now and then is just
palpable.
You know, I used to drive on my way to
school and we'd pass, you know, people
living in huts and hovels.
Now, you know, in a city like Shanghai
or Beijing, there's brightly lit
skyscrapers.
Energy is destiny. It decides whether
your country has enough capability to do
the things it wants.
And the countries that can't power new
industries like AI and EVs just won't
have as much of those new industries.
And so, if as a country you're not able
to build out the grid, you lose out on
being a competitive economy in the 21st
[music] century.
For the rest of the world, keeping pace
with China's fast-growing grid isn't
[music] going to be easy. But the grid
of the future isn't necessarily going to
look like the grid of the past.
New technologies to move electricity
could be the key to getting ahead.
Especially for CEOs who can nail the
photo shoot.
All right, give me a real casual lean.
Give me the elbow lean.
Nice.
My name is Tim Heidel. I'm the chief
executive officer at Veir.
>> [music]
>> Veir's building a new generation of
superconducting power delivery hardware.
Here at Veir, liquid nitrogen is
steaming. Machinists are machining and a
whole new way of moving electrons is
being commercialized.
Expanding the grid is far too slow to
meet the challenge that we're going to
see in the decades to come. We need new
technologies and new approaches.
We think superconducting transmission
lines can play an enormous role. We can
build lines that have a lot more
capacity than what you've been able to
build in the [music] past.
So, what is a superconducting cable?
See, your typical power cable is made of
a good conductor, a material that
electric current can pass through
without a lot of resistance. The more
resistance, the more energy gets lost
along the way.
>> [music]
>> Plastic has a lot of resistance, making
it a bad conductor. That's why it's used
for insulation.
>> [music]
>> Copper and aluminum have low resistance,
making them pretty good conductors. So,
we use them for most power cables today.
>> [music]
>> Via's cables, on the other hand, are
made of this stuff. [music]
So, I'm holding here a sample of the
superconducting material. It's a really
special class of materials that under
certain operating conditions, no longer
have resistance.
>> [music]
>> So, when you can operate a material that
doesn't have resistance, we can carry a
lot more power in a very, very compact
space.
Cables that [music] can carry more power
could be a big upgrade for the grid,
helping move a lot of electricity to the
data centers, homes, and EV chargers
[music] that need it.
They could also mean we don't have to
build as much new infrastructure, since
one superconducting cable could carry as
much power as several conventional
cables.
But first, Via needs to figure some
things out, like how to keep its cables
extremely cold. Yeah, so the cable, uh
we have it in this uh
test bed full of liquid nitrogen.
Um the liquid nitrogen is like 77
Kelvin, which is
um very cold.
In fact, it's somewhere between the
temperature of space and the dark side
of the moon.
The cable's got to be that cold to get
into its superconducting state, so it
can carry insane amounts of power.
Essentially, we use these large power
supplies to put a lot of current into
our superconducting cables.
We're in like a pretty large building,
and that draws almost all the power from
the building.
We have to like watch that the machine
shop isn't using something powerful at
the same time so we don't overload uh
the grid.
Yeah.
When we visited Via in 2025, the company
was starting to produce 10-m long
sections of its cables on this assembly
line.
Uh
is this thing on?
We're going extremely slow. Typically
takes about 2 weeks to make a cable.
In normal cable manufacturing, you can't
even see the the real spinning. It's
spinning so fast.
A lot of the manual things we're doing
right now
are going to be automated. And yeah, it
will be a much faster process.
Do you think about a future of these
cables stretching across America?
Stretching across the world? Um I I hope
so. I I really hope so.
Via has raised a little over a hundred
million dollars so far from investors
including Microsoft and it says it aims
to have its first cables on the grid
within a couple of years.
But none of this is easy or cheap.
The system needs vacuum tubes and a
continuous supply of liquid nitrogen
which could add a price premium over
conventional cables.
And there's another issue. Via's
potential customers, electric utilities,
aren't known for their high-tech
risk-taking.
It just can't be denied that
utilities are conservative businesses.
When you're worried about providing
power 100% of the time, you're going to
be very cautious about trying something
new.
I don't know we'll ever see super actors
be the only choice in this field but I
expect that the power density that they
can achieve will allow them to
increasingly dominate conversations
around future transmission systems.
So, will better cables moving more
energy be enough to power the future?
Well, even with better hardware, we
still have to keep the grid stable.
And lately, that's been getting harder.
Large parts of Spain and Portugal have
been hit by a power outage.
Tens of millions of people now who are
experiencing a total blackout.
It was the worst blackout in Europe's
modern history, [music] and it left
millions of people in the dark.
There were hundreds of people stuck in
metros, in trains,
shops, and supermarkets couldn't operate
because payment systems were down.
Spain's largest bank, La Caixa,
calculated that 400 million euros were
wiped out of the Spanish economy.
For most, life without electricity was
merely inconvenient
or an excuse to party.
>> [music]
>> And within about 18 hours, THE POWER WAS
BACK.
>> [screaming]
[cheering]
>> BUT A BLACKOUT OF THIS SCALE usually
points to a larger problem.
And this one has raised concerns about
the very structure of the modern grid.
For now, what we know is that there was
instability coming from some solar farms
in southern Spain.
Spain has added a lot of solar power in
recent years because, well, solar has a
lot of advantages for a grid. It's
clean, cheap, and versatile, and as a
result, it's growing exponentially,
helping grids to keep up with rising
power demand.
But, solar does seem to have played some
role in the Spanish blackout.
Not the sheep, though.
The sheep are innocent.
A lot of people blamed renewables for
the Spanish situation, but renewables
did exactly what they were told to do,
exactly what it said on the tin. You
know, when you look back, it was a
perfectly foreseeable car crash.
Guy Nicholson works for European power
company Statkraft. And inside this
building, Guy's got a machine that he
says could help prevent Spain-style
blackouts.
Well, this is a synchronous compensator.
Sorry, synchronous coffee maker?
Synchronous compensator. What was it,
syllabus commentator? A synchronous
compensator. An electrical machine that
weighs 100 tons. It's spinning round at
1,500 rpm, as you can see.
To understand why renewables can make
problems for the grid, and how this big
spinny thing can help solve them, we
need to dive a little deeper into the
grid's inner workings.
For the grid to work properly, it has to
be in perfect balance. The amount of
electricity being made has to match the
amount being consumed second by second.
If so, the voltage remains stable, and
everybody's happy. [music]
If not, the voltage can spike, and the
different parts of the grid start to
disconnect to avoid being damaged. It
starts with something falling over. That
causes the next thing to fall over, that
causes the next thing, and you get this
kind of domino effect where
>> [snorts]
>> the whole grid goes down.
Now, if the system failed every time
there was a slightest imbalance, we'd
have blackouts every day.
Fortunately, the grid has a saving
grace, inertia.
It goes right the way back to Isaac
Newton and the first laws of motion.
A A that is in motion will remain in
motion unless there is a force that acts
against it. That property, which I am
sure, even if you forgotten, you all
studied in high school,
>> [music]
>> is called inertia.
So, when you have an object like a
100-ton spinning turbine, it will
continue spinning at that same rotation
regardless of what's happening on the
grid.
And these spinning devices can be found
[music] in any traditional power plant.
They're the machines that actually make
the electricity.
Coal, gas, nuclear, [music] hydro, all
these have big spinning rotating
generators. And those machines have a
lot of inertia, a lot of spinning mass.
That inertia is like a little extra
energy that the grid can tap in case of
emergency.
So, say suddenly a power plant goes
[music] down. So, you don't have supply
and demand imbalance.
The spinning device notices that
something's gone wrong on the grid and
uses the inertia that's been built up to
inject just the right amount of power to
keep the grid stable. In that instant,
it loses a little bit of its rotational
speed and turns that energy into the
electricity that the grid needs.
And for most of the grid's history, this
worked just fine.
But, what's happening now on the modern
grid is that you're adding things like
solar that have no spinning devices in
them.
Solar panels convert sunlight directly
into electricity, meaning no spinning
generator and no inertia.
And in the past 5 years, Spain has
tripled the amount of solar it has added
on the grid.
So, when a couple of solar plants
suddenly went offline,
>> [music]
>> there wasn't enough inertia to restore
the balance and
lights out.
>> [music]
>> As we get more renewables on the grid,
we are going to need inertia.
We at Statkraft were
very much thinking about this problem.
Which brings us back to the silly mush
cogitator. Synchronous compensator.
Sorry, synchronous compensator.
It's just like a spinning device you'd
find in a coal or gas plant, but without
the coal or gas.
>> [music]
>> Add enough of these and your grid will
have all the inertia it needs, even with
no fossil fuel power.
>> [music]
>> It's providing inertia to the grid,
enabling the grid to run with more
renewables.
What we hear on the grapevine is Spain
is possibly going to do similar things.
Almost immediately after the blackout
happened, the parliament passed
regulations that would allow for more
types of devices like synchronous
compensators to participate in
stabilizing the grid.
Making the necessary upgrades won't be
cheap for Spain.
But they'll probably result in more
reliable and abundant electricity.
Exactly what rich countries need to keep
up with rising demand.
But of course, not all countries have
the money to make these kinds of
investments.
And as a result, [music] their grids
have lagged behind.
Sub-Saharan Africa has more people
without electricity than any other
region on Earth, about 565 million.
Grids are often limited to urban areas,
leaving large rural areas in the [music]
dark.
But grids are growing here, too.
Just a different kind of grid.
It's just cheaper [music] these days to
build out a local mini grid.
They are called mini because they are
really much smaller than what typical
grids are.
Where a traditional grid can cover
thousands of square miles, [music] a
mini grid typically serves a much
smaller area like a small island or a
village.
This Nigerian village is beyond reach of
the main grid, creating an opportunity
for private companies [music] to bring
electricity piecemeal.
Averagely, mini grids serves about 400
community members.
Husk Power has installed dozens of solar
mini grids across Nigeria.
Our mini grids runs for 24 hours.
Households use our electricity to power
up their appliances like fans,
TVs.
Children can now come back home and do
their homework at night.
Electricity helps local businesses, too,
by powering all manner of machines that
help residents earn more income, like
this rice milling machine.
All right, it might be a far cry from a
multi-billion-dollar data center, but
every grid has to start somewhere.
In the US [music] in the 1930s, the
government spent billions electrifying
rural areas, extending the grid across
the continent, [music] and helping the
US to become the richest country on
Earth.
In Africa, a similar project is
starting. A program called Mission 300,
[music]
backed by the World Bank, aims to invest
billions of dollars to get electricity
to 300 million Africans [music] by 2030.
If all goes to plan, in a few decades,
Africa's grids might not be so mini
anymore.
So, you may start with a bunch of mini
grids in Nigerian villages, which
[music] are then slowly interconnected
into a grid.
If every citizen has [music] access to
electricity, all right,
businesses will prosper, the
unemployment rate in the nation will
reduce.
People will come up and do things for
themselves, and
life as a whole will be better.
As As change and economies grow, the
world's [music] grids are evolving in
different ways, and it's not yet clear
which approach will lead to the greatest
returns.
But there's little question that the
grid will keep growing, [music]
empowering modern life for a long time
to come.
It's always hard to tell and [music]
predict what those next big steps are
going to be,
but the [music] grid is never going to
go away.
The world has clearly hit an inflection
point when it comes to energy.
All these new demand [music] sources are
going to require more and more power.
The grid isn't particularly [music]
glamorous, and it's a big job keeping it
going. But where there's grid, there's
often growth, and that's a pretty
[music] good incentive to make the grid
of the future the best that it can be.
>> [music]
[music]